fasten your seatbelts is your car
dealership ripping you off $1200 service
they are recommending none of which was
needed we're undercover you guys are
missing everything
tire rotation brake inspection again
overselling high-pressure tactics like
he was trying to scare me plus insider
secrets you have to upsell them they
come in for an all change your upselling
somebody just trying to get to the
bottom of why you're recommending
service it isn't required on the vehicle
this is your marketplace at some point
we all do this but when you bring your
car to the dealership for service yeah I
just thought it how do you know what
they recommend is what's really needed
[Music]
to find out we're recruiting Jessica
sell see you don't really know who to
trust when it comes to getting your car
fixed
with her newly purchased 2008 Honda
Civic this is our bait car first we
asked Jessica to bring it to this garage
for a pre inspection by licensed
mechanic mark Whitney nice to meet you
have you had any issues with it at all
is there any lights coming on nope
nothing
any rattles nope and then whatsoever so
it's completely dependable starting
running all right yeah after taking it
for a test drive
he begins
once an instructor Wynton is now a
vehicle safety advocate the verdict
change the wiper blades rotate the tires
that should be it
[Music]
Jessica's ready to check out what this
Toronto Honda dealership recommends well
based on my past experience with
dealerships you know I have a feeling
they're gonna try and upsell me and
Jessica's not alone we're hearing
similar concerns about upselling at
dealerships from across the country
including from Kathy Knight Kathy likes
to take her grandson Joe around Ottawa
in her 2011 Ford Fusion is CJ when her
car needs to be serviced sheet her
husband Craig always take it back to the
dealership why is it important for you
to go to the dealership to do your
maintenance they know the car best and I
just have confidence in them you develop
a relationship you depend on them to
give you advice when they give you
advice you take it last fall
Kathy neither snow tires put on so Craig
makes an appointment online with their
dealership but get this before even
inspecting her car he gets an email back
telling him it's also due for factory
required maintenance and it was changing
the spark plugs in the intake manifold
gasket and changing the transmission
fluid the PCV valve and holy cow
1,200 bucks where the stuff I was just
gonna get the snow tires put on and an
oil change time to get a second opinion
personally absolutely unequivocally
require less service so how do I know
when I go to the dealership what
maintenance I really need oh that's easy
go to your car yeah pull out your
owner's manual you take out the owner's
manual
and right here is the required
maintenance schedule in it will be
exactly what needs to be changed what
exactly needs to be inspected these
people designed and built the car they
are the source of information when it
comes to maintaining the car what the
manufacturer suggests in the owners
manual for maintenance and what the
dealership suggests are two different
things
in most cases yes
that's true they'll tell you that you
need more maintenance than your car
actually needs in some cases some
maintenance procedures your car doesn't
require at all so what about that list
of what Kathy's dealership says she
needs PCV valve oh I wouldn't bother
changing it it's a lifetime product now
the spark plugs on this car according to
the owner's manual is good for a hundred
and sixty thousand kilometers she is
nowhere near that change automatic
transmission fluid no well it's a big
list you just said no to a lot of it
yeah absolutely
so what's going on what's going on here
is the service advisor is trying to sell
this woman a lot more work that she
needs back in Ottawa Craig decides
they'll stick to what's recommended in
the owners manual but the dealership
pushes back telling him the manual is
describing normal driving conditions
here in Ottawa we have special driving
conditions due to the harsh weather the
owners manual says nothing at all about
special conditions about Ottawa or any
other particular city or geographic area
or country and doesn't say anything
about the cold weather it doesn't but
it's too late for Kathy and Craig did
you do the spark plugs
I did eventually the several months
later how do you feel about that now
that I was dumb I got taken in because
this says right here in the thing that's
in your car 160 thousand kilometres yeah
that's another two or three years of
driving in spite of knowing better you I
still did it because because they
recommend it and they sort of plant that
little seed of doubt and you think well
maybe they do know what they're talking
about
dealerships in Canada can make on
average only about a thousand to $2,500
on each new car sale
so there's service centers have become
important money makers back on our
undercover test
Jessica Scelzi checks in at Parkway
Honda I heard she booked in for a peace
of mind inspection check the brakes
suspension
[Music]
a couple hours later Jessica gets a
phone call from an assistant service
manager at Parkway Honda vibration the
vibration that he's able to duplicate is
coming from the brake drums they're
overheated and they're warped so what he
was suggesting is to replace the rear
brake drums and the brake shoes
what parts and labor Evon 621 plus tax
Wow
is that something that I can think about
okay thank you
Wow 621 bucks to replace her rear brakes
they also recommend another 112 dollars
for a brake fluid flush if she changes
him now
she'd be changing him a bit early she's
got 40% left and that might take another
six months she might get a year out of
it depending on her driving and I didn't
notice anything driving the car I didn't
either when I had the drums off
everything looked perfectly normal for
that age of break but there's something
critical the dealers not mentioning
the largest recall in automotive history
metal fragments from the exploding
ammonium nitrate capsule inside Takata
airbags have killed at least 14 people
hurt more than 180 including a metal
shard that went through this woman's
face in 2013 while she was driving her
Honda Civic I've taken the VIN off your
car and run it through the Honda system
your car has a passenger side airbag
that's made by Takata that needs to be
changed
Wow so why wouldn't they have mentioned
that to me he basically said he would be
doing everything short of a safety on it
which my mind should include an airbag
that is the number one safety problem
facing your car right now it's not rear
brakes
it's the airbag recall and so for him
not to mention that is unbelievable to
me Jessica heads back to pick up her car
maybe they'll tell her about the recall
in person the same assistant service
manager from the phone call hands are
the results of their inspection but
under any outstanding recalls incredibly
it's checked no Jessica gives them
another chance to own up
in the first three or four times I asked
him if there was anything wrong with the
car or if had any other safety concerns
other than the brakes he said no but
then without having to look it up
[Music]
he finally said at the end oh yeah I
think there's a recall and then he made
mention that he didn't have the part and
you have to book a later date for me
that just makes me sick because now I'm
driving a car that's unsafe to both me
and my passengers we contact this
assistant service manager for an
explanation but get no reply why would a
dealership not tell a customer about
this the dealership has has this
business relationship that's special
under contract with the manufacturing
facility in that agreement they have to
do work at a much reduced rate do you
think that ever influences dealerships
telling people about recalls absolutely
so did it influence Parkway Honda for
weeks we've been asking Parkway Honda to
come on camera to explain why they've
been recommending Jessica get serviced
she doesn't need but not telling her
about the service that she does need
well they've told us they're gonna do an
internal investigation but they will not
talk to us on camera that's what they've
said let's go chat with them
service manager era passion stops me at
the door okay but do you have an answer
about why she's not being told about the
recall these things but it's still it's
you know that that's not an answer to
the question about why she's not being
told about a recall it's still not an
answer the upsell continues power
steering steering your steering you know
it's probably gonna get Tiger that's
just funny but hopefully made up this is
your marketplace the real deal on
dealerships we're heading undercover
again testing the advice you get a
dealership service centers fake car
number two a 2013 Jeep Wrangler the
owner Eric works for us and for months
he's been getting emails telling him to
bring the Jeep in for service so we
asked him to make an appointment here at
Toronto Chrysler Dodge Jeep Ram what
will this service advisor recommend
[Music]
but check out Eric's owner's manual it
says it can be up to sixteen thousand
kilometres or twelve months before the
change oil message appears there is no
message and it's only been eight months
in just over two thousand kilometers
since Eric Schlosser oil change her
assessment isn't over yet it'll take a
couple hours for their technician to do
an inspection in the meantime we want to
get some inside knowledge so we track
down a former service adviser willing to
share trade secrets when your service
advisor you are a salesperson this is
how you make your living right so you
have to upsell them they come in for an
all change your up selling somebody
Lucas Leung worked at six different
dealerships we present it in a way and
let them know that this is what you
should do if you don't do it what's
gonna happen I'm a customer coming in
what do you say to me right out of the
gate yeah so I see that you're here for
an oil change today you're at a hundred
and fifty thousand kilometres actually
and due for a timing belt as well as a
coolant flush you can't do it it's up to
you but if you don't do it what happens
is that belt might wear out and when it
wears out you know like this could cause
overheating of the engine or it cause
even more problems down the road so was
there ever something in the dealership
that looked different from what the
owners manual said in terms of a
schedule they would have a little board
that shows you what needs to be done at
what kilometers but then there are
things on the site that they do
recommend that's suggested you know
recommended but not necessary for
example power steering flush throttle
body service transmission flushed you
accumulate an X amount of numbers each
month and you get a paid based on that
meanwhile Toronto Chrysler's inspection
is complete
the year for an oil change is not
acceptable not acceptable we show the
footage to mark Winton you want your
warranty to continue to transmission you
have to keep up on your oil changes if
they ever ask for it if you have a
transmission problem they're not gonna
worry today the truth of the matter is
you're gonna void your warranty if you
don't follow Chrysler's scheduled
maintenance advice not hers
this person is saying you know you need
to change your oil every three months no
this goes against what Chrysler says to
do with its own product the service
advisor lists their other
recommendations you guys are missing
everything tire rotation brake
inspection you do need grace really she
doesn't know we're also getting Marc
Whitten to do his own inspection of the
Wrangler
[Music]
so does he need brakes I wouldn't do
that I would wait another year or two
given how much this car is being driven
it makes no noise the brakes have full
power
are they worn down yeah they're about
half worn down but the owners gonna get
another you know year or two out of this
no problem the service advisors not
finished
you need an alignment okay you need to
replace your filters a whole bunch of
things you guys need to get your air
filter should be replaced once a year
I just inspected this car it does not
mean alignment the air filter doesn't
need to be placed once a year according
to the maintenance schedule again
overselling there's a conflict of
interest in this business and it's kind
of hidden people don't know they work on
commission but they do I would say 90%
of these dealerships do work by
Commission how much of your salary could
end up being on commission more than 50%
more than for their 751 of the
dealerships I have worked for I was 100%
in commission was that an incentive to
sell something that either wasn't
necessary or wasn't necessary at that
moment yes I would definitely say so
being on a hundred percent commission I
was very nervous like every day if is
you don't know how much you're gonna be
making some customers may not
necessarily need it right away but
they're they're obligated to do because
of how I advise it how I put it on the
table back in the dealership your spark
plugs are due to please the brain well
we checked the spark plugs in the owners
manual and it says Eric's don't need to
be changed for another 107 thousand
kilometers or six more years a power
steering flesh to steering your steering
you know it's probably going to get
tighter because it needs to be flushed
out that mileage right now you do not
recommend flushing it and as far as this
other stuff it might get tighter the
steering that's an that's a great one I
mean that's just funny that's like
totally made up think about it okay just
don't wait too long do you have any
questions just give me a call okay
do have questions we call and email but
this service advisor doesn't reply we
also contact the dealership but getting
answers from Toronto Chrysler Jeep Dodge
Ram that's been the tricky part so we're
gonna pay them a visit
ask in person general manager Dave Dodds
ok how are you good I'm David with CBC
marketplace David I'm sorry but this is
I can go but I'm just trying to get to
the bottom of know why you're
recommending service it isn't required
on the vehicle or why you're
recommending service more frequently
than than the manufacturer you have to
have a sense on that why you're
recommending that service that often do
your service advisors work on Commission
the dealership is owned by Auto Canada
based here in Edmonton with 65
franchises across the country it's one
of the largest auto dealer groups in
Canada we do some digging and find out
so far this year they have made more on
service than they have on selling new
and used cars combined well we asked for
some more information they won't come on
camera but the president of Auto Canada
writes to us and says he applauds the
manufacturers maintenance schedule
without explaining why his dealership
isn't using it will the government
crackdown if someone is found guilty the
penalty can range from a fine to jail
time potential this is your marketplace
get more market links sign up for our
weekly newsletter at cbc.ca slash
marketplace
this is your marketplace caught on
camera the dirt Lander standing was
those mister bringing in for a regular
maintenance aggressive upselling you
guys are missing everything
misleading inspections how do I not
press them several times he wouldn't
even mentioned Rico if this happens is
there anybody protecting you to find out
and I head to Ontario's watchdog the
Ministry of government and Consumer
Services hey Harry I'm David with CDC
nice to meet you yeah good to meet you
spokesperson Harry Malley what does the
law say about a repair shop telling you
you need to do something before you need
to do it or you don't even need to do it
at all repair shops cannot offer
services that aren't needed that's
against the law it could be in violation
of the consumer protection act so they
can't mislead you if it's the service
that's not needed they can't be like
this is needed to fix your car what is
the range of your power to penalize if
someone is found guilty the penalty can
range from a fine to jail time potential
it can go all that way yes a dealership
would say this is the work that you need
to do and then we would go to experts
and they would say no it doesn't need to
be done your brakes can last for months
or maybe another year before they need
to be changed so in those cases we we
want those consumers to reach out to us
if there was a violation we want to know
so we can do something about it and we
can find any bad actors that may be out
there so we we need the help of
consumers to make us aware you know I
think when I go and buy a car I am aware
that the sales person makes a commission
that's how they make their money I think
a lot of people would be surprised to
learn that many service advisors people
you come and meet they too are on
Commission and that they are essentially
incentivized to sell you more we want to
make consumers aware that they have
those rights they they need to know that
when they go to these technicians
whether they get a commission or not
they can't offer you services you don't
need and we can look into that if they
feel like some of their rights were
violated I have worked for brands that
really focuses on customer service like
hundred percent customer service no you
don't need to release sell sell sell
sell sell I mean like it's good so
there's good guys yes oh absolutely
I've worked with amazing companies out
there
so what can you do to prepare if you're
going into the dealership before you go
look at the mileage on your car see how
many kilometers are on it then have a
look at the doors owners manual go to
the maintenance section and see what's
required at that mileage or slightly
before somewhere near that mileage jerk
or months and once you know what that is
go right to that service advisor and say
I want these things done and what if
they push back well if they push back
you walk out the door
advice Jessica sell see could use since
our first bait car test she's been
getting notices in the mail from Parkway
Honda that I needed spark spark plugs
shock strut things like that even though
my car was just there and they just
inspected it but nothing about the
Takata airbag if it wasn't for
marketplace I wouldn't have known there
was a recall on my car today she's
bringing it to a totally different Honda
dealership to finally get that airbag
replaced
done finally what a relief I've been so
stressed out about having people in my
car having passengers like I didn't
realize how much I was bothering me
driving in traffic until now that it's
finally done
my car's safe yay we're inside farmers
markets I hope everyone's the day they
use that nor is it local people at the
market don't know they're buying that
food and they're being lied to
are you really buying direct from the
farm we follow the trail
Zoomers are paying a premium for your
product because they think that you brew
it are you ripping people off
[Music]
you